Design for moving the app graph to actual graph storage, decoupling it from K8s (#97)
radius-project/design-notes: architecture/2025-06-non-k8s-controlplane/2025-06-graph-db-replace-planes.md

## Proposal: Integrating Kùzu for Radius Application Graph

**Version:** 1.0
**Date:** June 4, 2025
**Author:** Sylvain Niles

---

> ### Overview

Reviewer: My understanding is that all the Radius state data (i.e. app graph and deployment state) is currently stored in etcd. This proposal is to move only the app graph data out of etcd and into a graph db, correct? and then separate but related work woul dbe to move the app state data out of etcd and into a db like Postgres?

Author: I've done a major rewrite to make this clear, yes you are correct. Today moving state data would be extremely complex with the number of RPs writing it, once extensibility is in use and we deprecate everything but CoreRP and DynamicRP we can revisit whether we want to move state.

### Terms and Definitions

* **Radius:** An open-source, cloud-native application platform that helps developers build, deploy, and manage applications across various environments.
* **Application Graph:** A representation of an application's components (resources, services, environments, etc.) as nodes and their interconnections as edges, including metadata on both.
* **Kubernetes (K8s):** An open-source system for automating deployment, scaling, and management of containerized applications.
* **CRDs (Custom Resource Definitions):** Extensions of the Kubernetes API that allow users to create custom resource types. Currently a common way Radius stores graph data in K8s.
* **Kùzu:** An embeddable, transactional, high-performance graph database management system (GDBMS) supporting the Cypher query language and property graphs.
* **Node:** An entity in a graph (e.g., a Radius resource, an environment).
* **Edge:** A relationship between two nodes in a graph (e.g., "connectsTo", "runsIn").
* **Property:** Key-value pairs associated with nodes or edges, storing metadata.

> * **Cypher:** A declarative graph query language.

Reviewer 2: would this require us to pull in Cypher as a dependency?

Reviewer 3: but there will be a new dependency for Kuzu..

Author: Yes, for dev/test, I've called this out explicitly. Technically people could point to any cypher graph db in dev/test as well via a config switch.

* **RP (Resource Provider):** A component in Radius responsible for managing a specific type of resource.

### Objectives

1.  **Decouple Graph Storage:** Abstract the application graph storage from etcd, allowing Radius to use a dedicated graph database.

> 2.  **Enhance Query Capabilities:** Leverage Kùzu's Cypher query language for more complex and efficient graph traversals and relationship analysis than what is easily achievable with Kubernetes API queries.

Reviewer 3: Were there alternatives to Kuzu considered?

3.  **Improve Performance:** Potentially improve the performance of graph read and write operations, especially for large or complex application graphs.
4.  **Increase Portability:** Facilitate the use of Radius in non-Kubernetes environments or scenarios where a dedicated graph store is preferred.
5.  **Maintain Existing Functionality:** Ensure that all existing Radius features that rely on the application graph continue to function correctly with Kùzu as the backend.

### Issue Reference:

* `radius-project/radius#<NewIssueID>` (To be created)

### Goals

> * First step in allowing the Radius control plane to run outside Kubernetes.

Reviewer 2: This was marked as a post-graduation feature. Why would we bring this in now?

Author: Performance issues, graph feature enablement, making a change requiring migration before major adoption.

> * Integrate Kùzu as an embedded graph database within relevant Radius components (e.g., Core RP, Deployment Engine).

Reviewer 4: I am not sure I understand if you mean this is a prereq for Radius to run out of kubernetes. Because, if instead of etcd, we use postgres as datastore, the info needed to build the graph would be in postgres. Please let me know if we are talking about some other point here.

* Define a clear schema for the Radius application graph within Kùzu.
* Migrate existing graph data representation (currently in etcd/postgres) to the Kùzu data model.
* Implement a data access layer (DAL, name TBD) service that abstracts Kùzu operations (CRUD, queries) for other Radius components.
* Update Radius RPs and controllers to use the new Kùzu-backed DAL for all graph-related operations.
* Provide migration tool for moving to graph db.
* Provide mechanisms for backup and potential restore of the Kùzu database as part of Radius install/upgrade/rollback operations.
* Develop a comprehensive test suite covering graph operations with Kùzu.
* Build this in a way that Kùzu could be swapped out for a network accessible graph database such as Neo4J or Postgres with Apache AGE extension.

### Non-goals

* Re-architecting more of Radius to eliminate Kubernetes as a dependency beyond the graph storage and access layer.
* Providing a distributed Kùzu cluster as part of this initial integration (Kùzu is primarily embedded; clustering would be a separate, future consideration if needed).

> * Exposing direct Kùzu Cypher query capabilities to end-users of Radius (interaction should remain through Radius APIs and abstractions).

Reviewer: can users connect to the Kuzu service directly to query the app graph though?

Author: They cannot, though we could expose an API on the GAL that allows for arbitrary cypher very easily. I imagine they'd be more likely to be doing that in non dev/test though

* Replacing all uses of the Kubernetes CRDs by Radius.
* Migrating existing Radius clusters to the new graph, a fresh install is required. (up for debate)

### User Scenarios (optional)

* **Scenario 1 (Developer):** A Radius developer needs to address performance issues for application graphs containing many resources. Retriving all resources connected to a specific environment, which is a very expensive operation. Using Cypher through the Kùzu DAL would be more expressive and orders of magnitude faster than multiple etcd calls and client-side filtering.
* **Scenario 2 (Platform Engineer):** A platform engineer wants to run Radius without Kubernetes, this is one of the decoupling features required. 

### User Experience (if applicable)

* **End-users (Application Developers using Radius CLI/APIs):** The change should be largely transparent. Existing commands and APIs for managing applications and resources should continue to work. Performance improvements might be noticeable.
* **Radius Developers/Contributors:** Will need to learn how to interact with the new Kùzu DAL and potentially understand the Kùzu data model and Cypher for advanced debugging or development.

> * **Operators:** Will need to be aware of the new Kùzu database component for backup, monitoring, and troubleshooting purposes. The operational burden of managing etcd for graph data would be shifted.

Reviewer 2: if this is primarily for local development and POCs why would operators need to treat it as an important component?

Author: I rewrote the section on scale/production recently, missed this and will fix.

### Sample Input/Output:

* **Sample Input (Conceptual Cypher Query via DAL, replicating `rad app graph todo`):**
    ```
    // Show the full graph for the "todo" application
    MATCH (app:Application {name: 'todo'})-[rel]->(res:Resource)
    RETURN app.name AS application, type(rel) AS relationship, res.name AS resource, res.type AS resourceType
    ```
* **Sample Output (from DAL):**
    ```json
    [
      {
        "application": "todo",
        "relationship": "CONTAINS",
        "resource": "frontend",
        "resourceType": "Applications.Core/container"
      },
      {
        "application": "todo",
        "relationship": "CONTAINS",
        "resource": "backend",
        "resourceType": "Applications.Core/container"
      },
      {
        "application": "todo",
        "relationship": "CONNECTS_TO",
        "resource": "todo-db",
        "resourceType": "Applications.Core/postgres"
      },
      {
        "application": "todo",
        "relationship": "CONNECTS_TO",
        "resource": "redis-cache",
        "resourceType": "Applications.Core/redis"
      }
    ]
    ```

### Design

> #### High-Level Design

Reviewer 5: What is the reason for splitting storage between kizu and postgres/etcd? Did we consider consolidating all storage in kizu?

Author: I've called this out, please resolve if the updates address your question.

1.  **Introduce Kùzu:** Kùzu will be integrated as an embedded library within the primary Radius component(s) responsible for managing the application graph (e.g., the Radius Core RP or a dedicated graph service).
2.  **Graph Abstraction Layer:** A new internal service or Data Access Layer (DAL) will be created. This layer will provide an API for all graph operations (e.g., `listDeployments`, `listResources`, and allow new operations like `showDependencies(resource)`). Internally, this DAL will translate these requests into Kùzu operations (Cypher queries, API calls to Kùzu's Go driver).

> 3.  **Schema Definition:** A formal schema for Radius entities (Applications, Environments, Resources, etc. as nodes) and their relationships (as edges with types and properties) will be defined and enforced in Kùzu.

Author: No, because all UDTs are a resource with a type, so the type property on each resource node in the graph is just set to whatever UDT the users create/use/deploy.

4.  **Data Synchronization/Migration:** We will need to provide a simple migration tool that copies existing Radius environments/app graph to the newly installed graph db.
5.  **Component Updates:** All Radius components that currently interact with etcd or postgrest for graph information will be updated to use the new Graph Abstraction Layer.

#### Architecture Diagram

```mermaid
graph TD
    A["Radius CLI/API <br/>(User Interactions)"]
    B["Radius Core Components <br/>(Control Plane, RPs)"]
    C["Recipe Execution<br/>(For non-graph <br/>resource mgmt)"]
    D["Graph Abstraction Layer <br/>(DAL)"]
    E["Kùzu Embedded DB container <br/>(kuzu.db file on disk allowing backup/restore)"]

    A <--> B
    B <--> C
    B <-->|"Uses (for graph ops)"| D
    D <-->|"Interacts with"| E
```

* **Current (Simplified):** Radius Core Components <-> etcd
* **Proposed:** Radius Core Components <-> Graph Abstraction Layer <-> Kùzu Embedded DB

#### Detailed Design

1.  **Kùzu Integration:**
    * The Kùzu Go driver (`github.com/kuzudb/go-kuzu`) will be used.

>     * Kùzu database will be initialized during `rad init`. The database file (`radius_app_graph.kuzu`) will be stored on ephemeral or persistent storage accessible to the Radius control plane. (requiring setup of a volume for laptop installations seems excessive)

Author: I've made a major rewrite that I think makes this clearer. Etcd cannot perform graph functions. Postgres can with Apache AGE and I've called out how that's done

    * Initially CoreRP will move CRUD operations using etcd to the DAL without using Kùzu.

>     * Once the DAL is released Kùzu support will be added in a pluggable way, allowing for future network graph db support vs the embedded solution.

Author: I added a ton of detail about this including install/config at the end of the doc

    * Ensure via debug logging that no components are communicating directly with etcd other than the DAL.
1.  **Phase 1: Core Integration (Milestone 1)**
    * Research Kùzu Go driver capabilities and limitations in detail.
    * Set up Kùzu as an embedded dependency - but as a pluggable architecture where the embedded calls could be swapped for network calls to any Cypher compatible graph database.
    * Define and implement Kùzu schema creation.
    * Implement robust error handling and transaction management in the DAL.
    * Add Kùzu specific tests (schema creation, backup/restore, etc)
    * Modify Radius init and upgrade processes to trigger appropriate behavior in the DAL.
4.  **Phase 2: Tooling & Testing (Milestone 2)**
    * Implement backup/restore CLI commands.
    * Conduct comprehensive E2E testing, performance testing, and security review of DAL threat model.
    * Develop documentation for operators and developers.
3.  **Phase 2: Query Enhancement (Milestone 3 - optional)**
    * Enhance DAL with more advanced query capabilities (pathfinding, complex traversals, to support new User Stories defined by product).

> ### Open Questions

Reviewer 5: We should consider failure scenarios in which etct/postres is out of sync with the kizu graph.

Reviewer 5: Here's one: if the graph DB is corrupted or lost on a production cluster, and a restore of it loses transactions, the graph will be out of sync with the RP database. Maybe there is no recovery from this type of scenario, but if we are going to have completely separate DBs that have related data, we should understand the impact of what happens when they are out of sync.

This proposal outlines a plan to modify Project Radius to utilize a **graph database** as the primary store for its **application graph data specifically**, accessed via a new **Graph Access Layer (GAL)**. This change aims to decouple the core graph logic and operations from etcd, enabling more powerful graph queries, improving performance for complex relationship traversals, and offering a more specialized and efficient graph persistence layer. **This proposal is scoped specifically to application graph operations - individual resource metadata and configuration will continue to use the existing `database.Client` interface with the current storage backends (etcd via Kubernetes APIServer, or Postgres for production deployments).** One of the benefits to recipe authors is this will allow them to define nested connections of types to both return complex relationships and properties to a recipe as well as see these relationships in the graph/dashboard.

> For development, testing, and proof-of-concept environments, we will provide Kùzu as the default embedded graph database. For production environments, the plan is to support Postgres with the Apache AGE plugin, which provides Cypher compatibility and is suitable for scalable, production-grade deployments. The GAL will be designed to support pluggable backends, allowing configuration of the graph database provider to be any supporting Cypher.

Reviewer 5: I think the key information that should be communicated in this paragraph is that any Cyphyer-compatible graph database can be used with the GAL. We expect to use Postgres with the Apache AGE plugin for production scenarios. If Postgres is too difficult to configure for development environments, we could substitute a different database like Kuzu. The database technology is not the point of this design--we know there are at least two that would work--the introduction of the GAL is the key idea in this document.

However, I think that since we normally use local Kubernetes clusters during development anyway, it would be simple to deploy a Postgres container to a local dev environment.

```suggestion
The GAL will be designed to support pluggable backends, allowing configuration of the graph database provider to be any database that supports Cypher. Postgres with the Apache AGE plugin is a good candidate for production scenarios. Other technologies like Kuzu could be used for dev/test or smaller footprint deployments.
```

> For development, testing, and proof-of-concept environments, we will provide Kùzu as the default embedded graph database. For production environments, the plan is to support Postgres with the Apache AGE plugin, which provides Cypher compatibility and is suitable for scalable, production-grade deployments. The GAL will be designed to support pluggable backends, allowing configuration of the graph database provider to be any supporting Cypher.

Reviewer 5: The document should have links to Kuzu and Postgres Apache AGE.

#### Architecture Diagram

```mermaid
graph TD
    A["Radius CLI/API <br/>(User Interactions)"]
    B["Radius CoreRP<br/>"]
    C["database.Client <br/>(Resource Storage)"]
    D["Graph Access Layer <br/>(Application Graph)"]
    E1["etcd (Current) | Postgres <br/>(Production)"]
    F1["Kùzu Embedded DB <br/>(Dev/Test/POC)"]

>     F2["Postgres + Apache AGE <br/>(Production)"]

Reviewer 5: I recommend collapsing these two nodes into a single node that is something like "Cypher compliant graph DB", unless we plan to hard code the dependency on Kuzu and Apache.

    A <--> B
    B <-->|"resource CRUD"| C
    B <-->|"graph queries"| D
    C --> E1
    D -- "dev/test/POC" --> F1
    D -- "production" --> F2
```

* **Current (Simplified):** Radius Core Components <-> database.Client <-> etcd/Postgres
* **Proposed:** 
  * Resource Storage: Radius Core Components <-> database.Client <-> etcd/Postgres (unchanged)
  * Application Graph: Radius Core Components <-> Graph Access Layer <-> Graph Database (Kùzu or Postgres+AGE)

#### Detailed Design

1.  **Graph Access Layer (GAL) Implementation:**
    * The GAL will be implemented as a Go service that abstracts all application graph operations, working alongside the existing `database.Client` interface.
    * It will provide a pluggable interface allowing different graph database backends.
    * Configuration will determine which backend to use (Kùzu for dev/test, Postgres+AGE for production).
    * The GAL will be responsible for maintaining synchronization between resource changes and their graph representations.

2.  **Dev/Test/POC Backend - Kùzu Integration:**

>     * The Kùzu Go driver (`github.com/kuzudb/go-kuzu`) will be used.

Reviewer 5: Are we planning to take a hard dependency from the control plane to Kuzu? Is there a way to make it config-driven? How about deploying Kuzu or Postgres as a container by default instead of having a direct dependency?

            DeleteEdge(ctx context.Context, edgeID string) error

            // Query operations
            GetOutgoingNeighbors(ctx context.Context, nodeID string, edgeTypePattern string) ([]Node, error)
            GetIncomingNeighbors(ctx context.Context, nodeID string, edgeTypePattern string) ([]Node, error)
            FindPaths(ctx context.Context, startNodeID, endNodeID string, maxHops int) ([][]Node, error) // More complex queries
            ExecuteCypherQuery(ctx context.Context, query string, params map[string]interface{}) ([]map[string]interface{}, error) // For advanced internal use
        }        type Node struct {
            ID         string
            Type       string // e.g., "Applications.Core/application"
            Properties map[string]interface{} // Minimal properties for query filtering only
        }

        type Edge struct {
            ID         string // Optional, could be derived from both nodes
            FromNodeID string
            ToNodeID   string
            Type       string // e.g., "Connection"
            Properties map[string]interface{}
        }
        ```

4.  **Data Persistence and State:**

>     * **Kùzu (Dev/Test/POC):** Kùzu runs embedded, so the Radius process managing it is authoritative. The database file (`radius_app_graph.kuzu`) is stored on persistent storage accessible to the Radius control plane.

Reviewer 5: What is the configuration that tells Radius to use Postgres vs. Kuzu?
